# 8. Namespaces - Organizing Components

## What is a Namespace?
A way to organize resources.  
It's like a virtual cluster inside a cluster.

---

## 4 Namespaces are created by default:

- **kube-system**
  - Not for your use.

- **kube-public**
  - Publicly accessible data.
  - A `ConfigMap` which contains cluster information.
  - Access that info using:
    ```bash
    kubectl cluster-info
    ```

- **kube-node-lease**
  - Heartbeats of nodes.
  - Each node has an associated lease object in this namespace.
  - Determines the availability of a node.

- **default**
  - Resources you create are located here.

---

## Create a Namespace

**Command line:**
```bash
kubectl create namespace my-namespace
```

See it in your list of namespaces:
```bash
kubectl get namespaces
```

You can also create a namespace using a configuration file.

---

## Why use Namespaces?

- Resources grouped in namespaces  
- Avoid conflicts (many teams, same application)  
- Resource sharing:
  - Staging and development  
  - Blue/Green deployment  
- Control access and set resource limits per namespace  

---

## Characteristics of Namespaces

- You **can't** access most resources from another namespace.  
  Example: each namespace must define its own `ConfigMap`.

- You **can** access a Service in another namespace.

- Some components can't be created **within** a namespace; they live globally in the cluster and can't be isolated.  
  Examples: `PersistentVolume`, `Node`.

Check non-namespaced resources:
```bash
kubectl api-resources --namespaced=false
```

Check namespaced resources:
```bash
kubectl api-resources --namespaced=true
```

---

## Create Components in a Namespace

Assuming you already created a namespace:
```bash
kubectl create namespace my-namespace
```

If no namespace is provided, the component is created in the `default` namespace.  
You can check it with:
```bash
kubectl get ${COMPONENT_KIND} <resource-name> -o yaml
```
and look for `metadata.namespace`.

**Method 1:** Provide the namespace in the command line:
```bash
# assuming the file doesn't have a namespace field
kubectl apply -f mysql-configmap.yaml --namespace=my-namespace
```

**Method 2:** Specify the namespace in the YAML manifest:
```yaml
metadata:
  namespace: my-namespace
```
**Method 3:** Change the active namespace:
```yaml
kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=my-namespace
```
don't need to specify again and again with this by method 3.
**Method 4:** Change the active namespace:
Change the active namespaces with kubens. You have to install the tool:
```yaml
choco install kubectx
choco install kubens kubectx
```
